RHDEVDOCS-3918 - Document Alertmanager for user workload monitoring (#46357)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/monitoring-applying-a-custom-configuration-to-alertmanager-for-user-defined-alert-routing.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="applying-a-custom-configuration-to-alertmanager-for-user-defined-alert-routing_{context}"]
= Applying a custom configuration to Alertmanager for user-defined alert routing 

If you have enabled a separate instance of Alertmanager dedicated to user-defined alert routing, you can overwrite the configuration for this instance of Alertmanager by editing the `alertmanager-user-workload` secret in the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` namespace.

.Prerequisites

* You have access to the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.

.Procedure

> . Print the currently active Alertmanager configuration into the file `alertmanager.yaml`:

Reviewer: since we already have file named `alertmanager.yaml`, 
http://file.rdu.redhat.com/bburt/RHDEVDOCS-3918-alertmanager-config-for-user-defined-monitoring/monitoring/managing-alerts.html#applying-custom-alertmanager-configuration_managing-alerts
it's better to change to `user-workload-alertmanager.yaml` to distinguish

+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc -n openshift-user-workload-monitoring get secret alertmanager-user-workload --template='{{ index .data "alertmanager.yaml" }}' | base64 --decode > alertmanager.yaml

Reviewer: `$ oc -n openshift-user-workload-monitoring get secret alertmanager-user-workload --template='{{ index .data "alertmanager.yaml" }}' | base64 --decode > user-workload-alertmanager.yaml`

----
+

> . Edit the configuration in `alertmanager.yaml`:

Reviewer: user-workload-alertmanager.yaml

+
[source,yaml]
----
route:
  receiver: Default
  group_by:
  - name: Default
  routes:
  - matchers: 
    - "service = prometheus-example-monitor" <1>
    receiver: <receiver> <2>
receivers:
- name: Default
- name: <receiver>
#  <receiver_configuration>
----
<1> Specifies which alerts match the route. This example shows all alerts that have the `service="prometheus-example-monitor"` label.
<2> Specifies the receiver to use for the alerts group.
+
. Apply the new configuration in the file:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc -n openshift-user-workload-monitoring create secret generic alertmanager-user-workload --from-file=alertmanager.yaml --dry-run=client -o=yaml |  oc -n openshift-user-workload-monitoring replace secret --filename=-

Reviewer: `$ oc -n openshift-user-workload-monitoring create secret generic alertmanager-user-workload --from-file=user-workload-alertmanager.yaml --dry-run=client -o=yaml |  oc -n openshift-user-workload-monitoring replace secret --filename=-`

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="applying-a-custom-configuration-to-alertmanager-for-user-defined-alert-routing_{context}"]
= Applying a custom configuration to Alertmanager for user-defined alert routing 

If you have enabled a separate instance of Alertmanager dedicated to user-defined alert routing, you can overwrite the configuration for this instance of Alertmanager by editing the `alertmanager-user-workload` secret in the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` namespace.

.Prerequisites

* You have access to the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.

.Procedure

. Print the currently active Alertmanager configuration into the file `alertmanager.yaml`:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n openshift-user-workload-monitoring get secret alertmanager-user-workload --template='{{ index .data "alertmanager.yaml" }}' | base64 --decode > alertmanager.yaml
----
+
. Edit the configuration in `alertmanager.yaml`:
+
[source,yaml]
----

> global:
>   resolve_timeout: 5m
> route:
>   group_wait: 30s
>   group_interval: 5m
>   repeat_interval: 12h
>   receiver: default
>   routes:
>   - match:
>       alertname: Watchdog
>     repeat_interval: 5m
>     receiver: watchdog
>   - match:
>       service: <your_service> <1>
>     routes:
>     - match:
>         <your_matching_rules> <2>
>       receiver: <receiver> <3>
> receivers:
> - name: default
> - name: watchdog
> - name: <receiver>
> #  <receiver_configuration>

Reviewer 2: In practice, the default configuration is much simpler than that. We can also avoid the nested `routes` field to keep it concise.

```suggestion
route:
  receiver: Default
  group_by:
  - name: Default
  routes:
  - matchers: <1>
    - "service = prometheus-example-monitor"
    receiver: <receiver> <2>
receivers:
- name: Default
- name: <receiver>
#  <receiver_configuration>
```

Author: Changed per your suggestion

----

> <1> `service` specifies the service that fires the alerts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> specifies which alerts match the route, in this example all alerts which have the `service="prometheus-example-monitor"` label.
```

Author: Edited per your suggestion

> <2> `<your_matching_rules>` specifies the target alerts.

Reviewer 2: this would be dropped if applying my suggestion above

> <3> `receiver` specifies the receiver to use for the alert.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<3> `receiver` specifies the receiver to use for the alerts group.
```

Author: Revised per your addition

+
The following Alertmanager configuration example configures PagerDuty as an alert receiver:
+
[source,yaml,subs=quotes]
----
global:
  resolve_timeout: 5m
route:
  group_wait: 30s
  group_interval: 5m
  repeat_interval: 12h
  receiver: default
  routes:
  - match:
      alertname: Watchdog
    repeat_interval: 5m
    receiver: watchdog
  *- match:
      service: example-app
    routes:
    - match:
        severity: critical
      receiver: team-frontend-page*
receivers:
- name: default
- name: watchdog
*- name: team-frontend-page
  pagerduty_configs:
  - service_key: "_your-key_"*
----
+

> With this configuration, alerts of `critical` severity fired by the `example-app` service are sent using the `team-frontend-page` receiver. Typically, these types of alerts are paged to an individual or a critical response team.

Reviewer 2: I think that we can keep only one concrete example of modified Alertmanager configuration and remove this part.

Author: removed
